
An Idea
What about conversational decision-making as decision-making but with the extra constraint that makes an exchange of information a conversation? It seems to be viable. [I need to formulate the structure of the tempo formalism regarding the decision-making theory + conversational constraint.] [So far I know of decision-making described in tempo formalism (through the book "Tempo") and I am currently writing the version of it in position formalism. Both formalisms are interesting as one keeps track of a sequential variable that is tempo (time patterns) and the other forwards a spatial variable that is position (space patterns). It is fair to say that my understanding of the decision making theory relies on the tempo+position insights combined.] [I think that there is a common basis that is the concept of "information" before choosing whether to put it in a sequence or within a space and there we have our two different approaches.]
Another Idea
There is also this concept of a "frame" within a discussion which put simply reads as the rules of what is permissible or not during the conversation. If we view the process as a game and the parties participating in the discourse as players then the "frame" is the rule book, but not the static kind, more of a dynamic rule book where each player has the ability to rewrite it, we say that, "one controls the frame". This concept makes a lot of sense in status game setups where the purpose of an interaction is either the demonstration or the establishment of a given status value. To fulfill that purpose one should assert dominance over the frame of discussion so to allow behaviors that suit and respect his status. My question now is, can all interactions be seen as a kind of status gameplay? I want to say yes. The obvious attempt to counter this would be to evoke the example of a laid back conversation that apparently isn't about status or a carefree conversation seemingly seeking truth. I argue that even in these the status game is still happening but once we relax our responses to intentional or non-intentional attacks and the other time we transfer the status game to abstract mental objects so that the dominance game happen among thought constructs to see which prevails. [The frame game/control] [https://youtu.be/bybyB_G9yGA]

A conversation can be seen as a frame interaction, in the sense where the interaction is ordered into a sequence of partial (or total) acceptance/denial of conversional frames presented by the parties within a conversation. The latter can be viewed as a series of utterances, the basic units of exchange within a conversation but for an utterance to make sense it needs a context and an intention (while the interplay between these two is left for later discussion), that explains why we have developed context-reading and intention-inference skills as they are necessary for discourse in general. The reason I am saying this is to raise the awareness about the true purpose of an inference which locally seems as a mere transfer of information while its reality is an implied frame where the utterance not only makes sense but also fulfills its intention. To elaborate more, imagine you are having the most generic conversation (nothing assumed here). You and with whom or what you converse are adding information as a process of building toward something. Each utterance is the partial expression of a mental model, meaning that it naturally implies it (speaking of the mental model). That structure of understanding that is a mental model is made out of rules encoding relations among concepts and distinctions that are fundamental to exhibit such view and makes it possible for one to entertain a thought that could translate into the utterance in question. The frame is this unspoken structure that regulates what is allowed to be said, in terms of our previous explanation this maps to how rules of understanding condensed in form of mental models regulate our utterances and metautterance The goal is that by expressing yourself you are trying make the other person accept your frame so that your message triggers the right reaction (the one intended) in the other person, you are trying to absorb him/her in a reality governed by your rules and understanding so that whatever you say is never wrong and is always sensible, in combat terminology they are within you innate domain where each attack of yours is unavoidable. The conversation parties will have this frame dynamic ongoing as the discussion unfolds. It is a game where you frame and reframe as an answer. One might present a frame, the other might just accept it and well discussion over. The other might reject it entirely and reframe things into what suits him. The rejection can keep happening but the discussion won't go anywhere and that is contraproductive which why we do partial rejection/acceptance, aka compromising and maneuvering. We read a frame and we accept the rules that can be exploited to our advantage and supplement them with further rules to enforce our vision, we reframe.

Metautterance - what is beyond the utterance, decorative and augmentative behavior. Interruption is a metautterance.
Second to an Idea
Information is the treated content during a decision-making process. Both consumed and generated, information is central to us, informational metabolism. The use of the word metabolism is justified because we tend to treat information as a substance with qualities that affect its consumer in a chain reaction fashion pretty much how your body reacts when you indulge food. Of course there is the other part where we generate other substances through different processes that are necessary to our sustain. It is clear that decision-making agents perform informational conversions by effecting decisions. Seen through this lenses decisions are information converters. [Then you have concepts like, (1) entropy, a measure of the organization of information, (2) insight, an organizing principle over accumulated information or an entropy lower device, etc.]
A recap
The fact that now we have three definitions for the "what is a decision?" question, we are sure to say that yes we do have three formalism, namely, three ways of formulating decision-making theory. "Decision is what moves from a position to another within a space". Logistic definition. Based on the P/K analogy. Spatial. Mobility. "Decision is what bridges two action together in a sequence." ... definition. Based .... Sequential. ... "Decision is what converts information within a metabolism/narrative." Informational definition. Based on the substance metaphor. Material. ...
Tempo Formalism
Someone's life history is made up of multiple enactments running along and over each other. This is our modeling of "a lot happens during a lifetime" which isn't just about the length, that is, the number of events but more of how much is happening at once. An event or a situation you are in affects much more than what seems immediate because "if you are here, you aren't there" there are consequences to whether you are busy with one enactment or the other and how connected is the enactment on the foreground to the rest. This is what makes life's decision-making so complex, we play games within games and we assume different roles all at once, keeping track of all of this cannot be done one decision at a time even though that would be ideal as we are tracking the one true variable of theory. Sadly that isn't possible and we ought to look for a parameter that is both readable and can be altered to guide manage multiple ongoing enactment purposefully without considerable strategic loss.
Tempo has three elements: rhythm, emotion and energy. The rhythm of every situation has a texture to it. Tempo intercomponent interactions: 1.Emotion results when you force yourself or some part of the environment to operate at a faster or slower tempo than it likes. 2. To change tempo you must add or remove energy by applying a force (momentum change). 3. The emotion of a tempo can change with no change in pace and no new external factor. Simply due to the existence of a crave for variety and stimulation (there is more to say about this "crave").
Basic agent-tempo interactions:
merging
going with the flow
pace-setting
pace-disrupting
Bare structure
The basic unit of a decision-making process is naturally a decision which I view as a complex quantity in the sense where, decision = action + i thought. Action is the real component of a decision which makes sense according to rationalization of the situation which takes form within the imaginary dimension where thoughts reside. The rationalization is called a mental model, that is, an edifice based on a theory of the situation which attempts at the explanation of the status quo and suggests meaningful follow ups, interactions and predictions. This leads us to think that a mental model must be made of things that naturally find continuation in action. The best progression I've encountered to this day is the Belief-Desire-Intention differentiation of thought. Action can be termed as the externalization of a mental model. This process can be partial as in using only relevant parts of the model that suggest local actions to answer a situation or total as in the materialization of the full model as object of real experience. [Partial or total expression of a mental model.] Mental models are first internalized and find form in thought then externalized through action. This shows how a mental model is a necessary construct for decision-making. Once one understands the base structure behind decision, we think of them as building blocks and combine them the same way we combine words to make meaningful phrases, we here call their equivalent decision patterns. These can be classified according to the distribution and visibility of situational information into reactive, deliberative, opportunistic and procedural patterns. The next step involves the combination of many phrases into passages; decision patterns chained make enactments which are revealing of a style, a principled usage of decision patterns for situation-specific dealing. The externalization of a mental model often results in an arrangement of the reality's physical components into something that could be codified, that is, can be cast in a form that can manifest in material terms, and embedded, as in having physical consequences that can last. To sum up externalization would result in what we call a field which has to fulfill two reality conditions, that is, possibility and stability. Fields are all around us, they are the result of human understanding and its expression. The purpose of those fields is help us navigate the world much more efficiently and thus they are interfaces for us to interact with to make use go through designed (to some extent) experiences. We as decision-makers interact with fields and that results in a set of behaviors exhibited all along the our experience, such behaviors are termed flows. One field might be such as we have a multitude of possible flows or just one. We can have a field externalized such as it has a preferred "suggested" flow for optimal experience or any other reason, etc. On another account, flows are just strings of behaviors or actions resulting from us internalizing the externalized mental model in question. Under this view, a flow is the observable part of one's enactment, because an enactment has much more to it and what I mean by that is that its components namely decision have an imaginary component that doesn't have a material substance. It also makes sense from the angle that observables are facts and what are facts if not interactions? Situations are local complex spatiotemporal distributions of raw/sophisticated information and informational metabolisms along with all possible interactions that exist among them. The resulting dynamic dissociates into <foreground/background> where the background is made of receding predictable rhythmic elements while the foreground contain unusual a/rhythmic element that stand out and come in focus. Situation-awareness is the process by which we get accustomed to the dynamics of the background so that whatever remains unexplained and not suiting is material for active engagement, namely, the foreground. [Now, one can say that situation-awareness presupposes a <foreground/background> distinction with its substructures within the agent's mind and that is provided by what we call a mental model. The latter is a dynamic, unstable and partially coherent understanding of the situation.] Contexts are the background against which extended episodes of connected decision-making play out. Context-switch, is the process by which we exit one context and enter another.
Position Formalism
What is position? It is a nonlinear variable that presupposes the notion of a space. What are the characteristics of a position? We hear about <high-ground = a position that provides a considerable advantage> and <vantage point = an advanced position>, etc. A position is like a screenshot of what is happening in space featuring the relationship of one thing with respect to the rest. What makes a position is then, relations. Relations are like point in sequences, they are fundamental units. What are the qualities that relations mediate? Potentia is a property of a position with regard as to what it can be. The (possibly) accessible positions from a given position via meaningful action is what makes its potentia. The position not only represents what it is but also contains what it can be. This reality-possibility relationship is what makes us tell if a position is good or not. What is interesting about a position immediately? Perspective/angle.(affects the quality of actions available immediately) Control (offered by the position) Mobility (the number of available actions from a given position)

What is a position in the context of decision making? It is both the localization of an entity within a field and also its perception of the rest of it, its logistic relations and available actions.
An asset is what makes something's potentia. Action consume resource to effect change.

A situation abstract to a logistic space where the position one takes affects both the quantity and quality of actions available to hold or transition to positions of interest.

Solid position=position(with high inertia), Influential position=position(from which most powerful actions are all accessible either directly or indirectly) Strong position=position where you have a great potentia with high momentum actions to favorable positions.

Action is what shifts a position to another.

The logistic space is that representation of the physical space which matters from a positional perspective. Archetypes occupy positions from which they perceive a mapping of the various types that make a field of conflict and cooperative patterns. The interaction among archetypes on this space is understood through asset exchange. The result of which is repositioning.

I did much thinking and here is the idea. Position is a concept that presupposes the notion of a space. But what space if we are speaking about decision making? The logistic space. It is obvious that decisions are about managing assets in a certain way to lead the situation down a favorable path. Such space is that representation of the physical space which matters from a positional perspective. How are we going to study such space and have insight on its main variable, position. Here comes the genius, you should generally think that <physical space=/=logistic space> but there is a physical object where these two overlap and it is nonother than the game of chess. This links the understanding of position based decision making to chessologics. [Position// form, influence and initiative]

In an attempt to find out what are the components of position in a negotiation phenomena. I've had a discussion with someone lately and the analogy that lead our considerations is that of two people arguing and the variation of their relative positions via the interplay of facts they are presenting. At first the person draw a small sketch of two people standing on piles of facts. The idea here is to say that part of what defines your position in an argument is that amount of facts at your disposal to forge arguments and proposals which in some sense defines what we called the power of your position. That is, value driven from quantity. Then the same person pointed out that facts aren't all equal, some of them are good and others are bad, which something intuitive to say. There is some quality feature attached to facts, some are more solid, some are very fundamental. In all cases such good facts influence people and may even change their positions. "Well an influential fact is a fact that is very connected and rooted. You can use it in multiple ways and people relate to it and so you are able to use it to draw their attention and speak to them in terms they understand and follow." From that it was clear that in addition to power we had to add influence. The value driven from connectivity. At this point of the discussion we had to explain the origin of the quality of fact and while looking for an intrinsic structure to them, we found the article "Wittgenstin's Revenge" very serving as it considered facts as the product of observation, context omission and trust (in the observer + context omitter). The quality of the fact is affected by the quality of the observation (or measurement) and that of the context omission (application of some <ir/relevant> filter). Yet we have a component that doesn't have much to do with the thing itself but more with who is associated with it, trust. This realization did send us after third positional component, which is authority. As of course, someone who is an authority in some domain is a trusted party with the facts of that specific domain. Authority is value driven from trust. The result of such discussion is that what defines "position" are three components each being a value driven from fundamental logistic concepts. These components are power, influence and authority. A negotiation trades between these values among players positioned in various way to reach a desired logistic configuration that satisfied all parties or some of them.
Effective Structure
A decision theory that makes sense is one that integrates the essential elements of the most trivial observation one can make being that, all our decisions are among life stories that end with our individual deaths. Not only integrating but also connecting them into an insightful body of knowledge revealing and inspiring to adopt new positions with respect to certain situations and modulate them to our will. The previous observation contain three fundamental concepts: decision, story and death, being organized in layers the being first a kernel, the second is the application of a structural constraint and the last is the polishing layer, terminal constraint. Regarding "decision" much has been done within the bare structure of our theory. The remaining two will be treated here. [This theory has <bare/effective> devise which is reflective of the interface presented by decision phenomena. To put it simply, we deal mostly with stories and death at the macroscopic level of our lives. The notion of a decision and the sophistication springing from it as laid out previously are along this line of reasoning, microscopic. What do we deal with belongs to the effective and what is necessary but implicit is, bare.]
There are always multiples narratives at work, framing our perceptions, thoughts and actions.
There can be no such thing as non-narrative thought. There is always a narrative at work.
A narrative is a stylized condensed account of the situation, and how it is view so to understand its on going.
There is no meaningful way to talk about a specific decision outside of a narrative frame and a concrete context. Meaning is generated at the junction between the abstract narrative and the concrete situation.
Narrative rationality is the idea that there are many useful, local (situated) and temporary rationalities.
Situated decision-making is best described by a theory of relativity of rationality. Its principle would be that there is no privileged, narrative-independent, model of decision-making that can be labeled absolutely rational.
Models of rationality lie inside the mental models and narratives contexts that operate by them. (Rationality=Frame).
Deep stories are the largest scale at which we enact meaning.
A deep story is the explanatory basis (Frame) of last resort for most intentional human behaviors.
Narrative rationality is the ability to think, make decisions, and act in ways that make sense with respect to the most compelling and elegant story that you can improvise about a developing enactment.
Deep stories are enactments that create unique mental models applying only to one significant new situation. They require us to continuously improvise the background story while acting. The mental model is constructed as the enactment unfolds.
Stories have structure and that structure is best represented by a heuristic plot of entropy (measure of the disorder in your developing mental model) over time (the unfolding of the story).
Such plot is made of graphical elements which I believe are interesting to interpret. We have: (1) the rising-action , (2) the falling-action, (3) the flat-action, (4) insight-inflection, ...
What stories are about deep down is the evolution of mental models, that is, our understanding. As we live through situations, the interaction of our operating mental model with archetypes, prototypes, and fields will cause a change in entropy as the generated data from that dynamic will be absorbed into the pre-existing informational structure resulting in the alteration of the previously found order, so that now we need to fit everything old and new in a coherent stable body of knowledge that will make up for a newer version of the developing mental model. As I described in the <vertical/horizontal> knowledge article, the addition of new information to previously existing data raises the question as the status of their relationship (problematic or not) and depending on the answer we can have an idea as the scale of disturbance our understanding underwent. Resolving such chaos requires us entropy-lowering devices, insights, organizing principles that will make the pieces of our fragmented understanding find the next coherent form. Now it is clear that entropy-wise, the before and after are totally different.
Death for a decision-maker (an informational metabolism) happens via either (1) entropy increase that is singular (beyond the capacity of any entropy-lowering device available at the moment) generally caused by unknown-unknowns (things that you don't know that you don't know about) or (2) entropy accumulation to a terminal point where the informational body is simply not able to lower anything so that any increase becomes fatal. The latter tells us that decision-makers not only have a fixed capacity for absorbing open-world information but also exhibit entropic-aging, that is, every story we go through not only furthers our understanding but also raises the entropic levels of our models. We battle entropy by employing our understanding to engineer entropy-lowering devices "buying time" to further our understanding even more (hoping to find more efficient entropy-lowering devices), yet we can never bring entropy to zero, stopping our aging. [This is the most generic definition of "death".]
Archetypes are models of people and prototypes are models of things. Metatypes are models of models.
Decision Linguistics
A study of decision is before anything a study of thought, action and how they bridge. The last part is most important of all because we aren't looking at any kind of instantiation of understanding about thought and action, but one that encodes the fundamental constraint that is, the coherence principle. It states that, the decisions we take now constrain those we'd take in the future. In this form, there isn't much more we can extract from such principle beyond the trivial. Yet, if we recall the complex nature of a decision we can find it a more interesting form. Thought and action mutually constrain each other (what we think constrains our actions, and likewise what we do affects our thinking). As decision is the dealing with information, it is fairly easy to explain this interaction in informational terms. Thoughts are the results of an internalization process which takes in external situational data and integrates within a partially coherent body of understanding, a model. This latter is what we use to act purposefully in a given situation, and thus thought constrain action. Action is the externalization of our understanding and its partial realization into a field. By effecting some situational change through action we alter the external information distribution which after internalization will integrate the change within a new frame understanding altering our thoughts and so action define thought. It is clear now that decision is comprised of two movements, internalization and externalization. It is an information exchange among models and fields, which makes up for what we call decision dynamic. Its kinematic space contains only two states (of information), either thought or action. We know that <kinematic+force=dynamics>, what is the force and how can we integrate it? Force implies change of momentum, so if we can somehow manage to have it emerge from models and fields, we know then that things are connected the right way with the right image associated to them. A model is a thought construct that embodies our understanding about something out there. A basis that is, an instantiation of our both the idea that thought should naturally find continuity in action and that models ought to have a property that is momentum, is one that differentiates thought into: belief, desire and intention. The natural progression is that beliefs constrain possibilities (possible worlds), desires lead to preferences among them and intentions represent commitments to specific courses of actions. These components will are capable of movement meaning that they evolve as they interact with new data or among themselves when the interaction isn't trivial. That movement combined with inertia (that quantity of information that model holds) yield a "virtual" momentum that can be communicated to reality exactly because "thought should find continuity in action". [It is so odd that this thought vocabulary is one that works well with stories, the beginning of model of the situation is a story.][We internalize through stories] A field is the realization of a model, to put it parallel, it is an action construct. One need not to fetch to far for a good basis as the only constrain we need to respect here are what is physically possible. A field is the arrangement within space of a set of material objects in a given pattern. And so "action" differentiates into: spatial, material and pattern tactics, all of which being the most fundamental devices to play with fields. Metaphoric thinking and specially conceptual metaphors are the devices that complete the "thought should find continuity in action" bridge from this side as they allow us to extent our action vocabulary by mapping various domains of experience to the most fundamental ones being: space, matter and patterning (space-matter combination). The inertia of the field is about quantity of substance (matter) within it. The displacement of such substance within the field has momentum under the formula, <momentum=movement+inertia>. [The patterning contains "virtual" momentum transferred through the expression of the model.] [We externalize via enactment] In reality, we don't interact with models and fields at the component level. We deal with more compact structures that makes up our lives in every possible way, namely, narratives and enactments. Narratives are not only a fundamental mode of human cognition but also mental objects which can be disassembled into a set of beliefs which build a possible world with its content, desires that animate the actors within and intentions that commit these actors to certain paths. A narrative or a story is a human interface to deal with models, build , alter or share them. A model aimed at understanding a certain situation starts generally by us forming the simplest theory as to why things are arranged the way they are and that naturally takes the form of a narrative, simplest most compelling story one can come up with on spot. Enactments or flows are generated from the interaction of models with the fields that make up a situation. They are action phrases that move the situation forward. An enactment is naturally made of a sequence of actions that can be mapped by conceptual metaphors to a combination of spatial, material and patterning tactics. The reason this is possible is that fields in general regardless of the domain of experience to which they belong are read in a way that is similar to every human. Space, matter and the arrangement of the second within the first (patterns) are things that are universally experienced, and so they forge the very first primitive and fundamental circuits that deal with fields. To put it under other terms, they make up for a base action vocabulary that is extensible to other domains by metaphoric thinking as fields share the same base structure. Decisions are framed by narratives and are the constituents that make up enactments, the same way words make up texts and paragraphs. Single decisions are rarely meaningful on their own, pretty much how single words are hardly meaningful on their own. Meaning manifests at the level of phrases the equivalent of which in here are decision patterns. These are decisions phrases that effect a readable changes in the situation they are meant to answer and in turn these changes must be internalizable to alter and adjust our understanding. The shift in understanding is due to the injection of meaning in the situation through a decision pattern. What is meaningful in here, is what can be internalized. [An interesting insight about meaning we got here.] We recall that decisions are information converters implying that they take in data from the situation and convert into a change in the situation which at the end of the day is a rearrangements of its field components. Decisions then are sensitive to the distribution and visibility of situational information. Distribution being an spectrum between two extremes where most situational information is available either internally or externally, and visibility (how much is legible?) being either high or low. Doing the combinations we can distill four possible situations to which there is an ideal type of decision pattern to answer it. Reactive patterns serve best in situations where information is both highly visible and externally distributed. In such pattern no new injection of information is effected because the series of tactics are chosen from what is suggested by the situation itself. The perk of reactive pattern is how fast they can be enacted. Their downside is that their require a fair amount of flexibility at reading and managing external energy/momentum to play with and wield the information already present at your disposal. Deliberative patterns thrive in high visibility situations where information is available internally. That allows one to rely on a priori calculus to generate new information that isn't directly available and inject it in the situation through tactics that aren't deducible from immediate information but manufactured internally from it. Deliberation takes time and that is its only downside. It requires us to simulate possible worlds employing a logic suggested by the source metaphor structuring our enactment and whichever simulation gathers enough momentum, that is, aligns with a profitable model, will generally guide our behavior. Opportunistic pattern are useful in the case of low visibility situations where the relevant data about it are found internally. The class of situations that fulfill such distribution/visibility conditions are those where we "unconsciously" (low visibility = the situation isn't visible to our conscious) recognize a situation from one enactment while being absorbed in another. This tells suggests that what we call a "situation" in general is but a part of layered reality, where multiple enactments are attached to and affect each layer. The main channel is selected by the on going enactment. The rest is in pause mode, in the sense that, the models associated with the rest of the enactments and containing the relevant (internal) data about them recede to the background. An opportunity is when something moves to the foreground, gains in relevance with respect to what is already relevant (object of active dealing) because of a spot on gain (entropy lowering). An opportunistic pattern answers an opportunity which is a bargain for the price of inducing an inefficiency in an on going enactment. Procedural patterns are highly efficient in low visibility with externally distributed information kind of situations. Everything that is relevant is embedded in a field that also encodes a flow (that could be complex) for us to follow unconsciously. The perk of such patterns is that they don't require conscious understanding to work, hence they can be enacted fast and have low chances to fail. Based on what we said previously the real meaningful units of an enactment aren't decision but decision patterns. And a consistent principled usage of patterns that answer a situation mixed with domain-specific aesthetics reveals a style. An enactment style is a choice of patterns aimed at producing a certain effect that is supposed to be advantageous in the given situation and leads to resolution. Part of the style is about the aesthetics of the domain within which the situation arose. One can find that some situations pertaining to different domains share the same core when we abstract aesthetic matters, implying that we can import styles from one domain to another providing that we can find a metaphoric mapping among them. An example: to produce an acceleration effect in a situation, we choose (beforehand) to move around rapidly (deliberative), we act in response to and faster than the opponent (reactive) while looking for an opening (opportunistic) to exploit via a vocabulary of trained answers (procedural). The acceleration's deliberative component is aimed at injecting entropy in the situation faster than it can be removed which urges whoever is dealing with you to come up under pressure with bigger entropy-lowering devices which most often are bound to fail making an opening for you triggering an opportunistic if-condition chaining into the right procedural follow up. You are operating at a faster tempo than your opponent which urges him to catch up and thus to answer the condition you are setting which from your perspective makes him slower and so the reactive component can be constantly employed as the situation you are making is advantageous and the answers found in it work for you and can naturally chain into hard trained procedural components. An enactment style is all about managing information and modulating its properties. Its effectiveness relies mainly on the domain's privileged pattern of information flow.
Fields are external physical arrangements of realized archetypes and prototypes.
A strategy is an organizing principle aimed at modulating entropy.
A tactic is a metaphoric mapping among primitive action concepts in two or more domains.
Some Thoughts
In conversations, the information's effect is cumulative rather than isolated which gives it this building toward something character to it.

Among the tools available in a discussion, questions are certainly the most interesting. Their usage is so varied that we can't stress enough their importance.

While it is all about information, we can still think of it in term of position, as if we had a space. We can label such space, the space of answers, solutions or explanations. And it is clear that adopting a position constrains your future positions and so your path through the space. [Another form of the principle of coherence.]

Open questions are used to determine the subspace of preferred positions. Close questions are used to make someone choose between taking a position or not. Leading questions can be used to set up our target in a a position that suits us for follow up. Assumptive questions are used to verify the accessibility of a position to our target.

Close/Open questions are what we call RECON questions, while leading/assumptive questions are MANEUVER questions. The difference between the two types is about how much is the questions loaded with information. In the first kind we don't have enough information and this our questions seem straight forward the need for information and clarification is felt from them. In the second kind, the questions are what we call "loaded with information" aimed at influencing our way of dealing with the question as well as our perception of the situation.
Conversiologics
What is the conversational constraint? [I came to realize that the lens through which I came to see "conversations" became too grand that I have no way to distinguish a conversation from any interaction that happens around us. The original plan was to apply the <decision-making + conversation-constrain = conversational decision-making> formula but along the way <decision-phenomena ~ conversation> condition established itself.] Conversations obey social rules that regulate the game around the "status" variable, like respecting turns, authority commands interruption, etc. Those social rules are represented by structure we call a frame. <conversations ~ status games?> The conversational constrain is applied by attaching a status variable to archetypes + a frame to modulate their interaction. // If a model is a thought structure that represents understanding, then a frame is what tells us which model is most acceptable based on the status-relationship it entertains with the rest of the involved models. High status is what enables one to setup and control the frame governing the situation. Status is dynamical especially in unsettled relationships as it is not clear which party is of higher status and that only the interaction will reveal locally who detains that. Sometimes the game is settled from the get-go and the status is established which leads to maneuvers, etc. Status can be associated to the amount of resource under your control allowing you to cause considerable change to the situation by enforcing that fact. Status represent the variable that matters locally, it is not a precise thing in itself it can be anything as long as it determines the relationships among models and indicates which sets the frame. If in the situation being correct is what matter then, status=truthfulness, being knowledgeable then status=expertise, being right then status='whatever gives the impression of being right'. [What about <conversation=narrative+negotiation>?]

Regarding frames I believe that at some level we can speak about two kinds of rules, (a) regulative rules, can be broken with a variety of effects that range from acceptable to less acceptable ones and (b) constitutive rules, cannot be broken without some noticeable consequence.

I believe that that two aspects that make conversations what they are from an aesthetical perspective are the topic that titles the conversation and the turntaking to contribute to the topic in question. The topic must be something that can be put in propositional form. Such proposition is the starting point of the activity and speech acts will affect it in various ways to suit those involved in the conversation. The topic can very much change throughout the process and the matter of suitability of the topic is purely regulative. The turntaking is also purely regulatory and so actions like yielding or claiming a turn are totally possible.
Keywords:Conversation. Conversers. Conversationalist. Conversiologics
Narratives
Life is as a musical piece made out of notes and silences except that here we are speaking about narrative richness. Implying that there are parts of life where we live through a narratively rich context, a note phrase, and other times where we experience situational emptiness, that is, silence. The silences are what delimits note sequence and what give the overall rhythm. The note phrases can be long or short depending on their purpose but what they are for sure is something rich in content compared to silences. We call the silence liminal passages. Liminality is the quality of ambiguity or disorientation that occurs in the middle stage of a rite of passage. [Explains why silence can be used to produce dramatic, mysterious, suspense effects] The note phrases can be structured in various ways but what we are interested here is how would they affect models. Models being thought constructs, they are affected by actions according to the coherence principle. The narratively rich parts of life when plotted as entropy-over-time graphs yield structures with spikes that resembles an action signal. The reason for this is that even if a part of an enactment is technically made of a lot of actions, if the whole string of actions can be describe as one action (the purpose) well, the string must obey the entropic-temporal structure of an action, as in, the sequence can be split and matched with the various phases that makes up an action.

Freytag triangle - alter an existing model. Rising action > Climax > Falling action

Canonical Narrative Structure // Double Freytag triangle - creation and confirmation of a model. Exploration > Cheap trick (Creation) > Sense making > Valley > Heavy lift > Separation event > Retrospective Exploration (Tempo: Volatile, dissipative)
"I will know when I find it."
A situation dominated by unknown-unknowns.
Period during which raw information is accumulated to build a model.
Random behavior is a natural choice.
(4.+2.) lead to randomness of what is discovered to make (3.) leading to the increase in both size+entropy of the model. Cheap trick (Tempo: Crescendo)
(5.) cannot happen indefinitely as <high-entropy~anxiety> which implies the need for an entropy-lowering device.
The device is obtained once an exploitable pattern in the data of (3.) has been spotted leading to the formulation of an organizing principle -insight, filter- that will draw a relevancy boundary.
The byproduct of (7.) will decrease the size+entroopy of (3.) to keep only what conforms to the pattern (filtering) and obeys the organizing principle (orderliness). [A cheap trick is a <ir/relevant> knowledge tool.]
"To every complex question, there is an answer that is simple, elegant and wrong." is the kind of answer that is a cheap trick in response to the driving question, 'what is going on and what should I do?'.
(9.) is a natural consequence of (8.) in the sense that we are saying that some reality-data is irrelevant, implying that whatever we get away with is valid to some extent (domain of relevancy) in the sense that as we go through the situation we will discover how short our model falls in understanding. And it will eventually fail as the cheap trick is merely for buying time.
What you get from (10.) serves to cheat the situation by giving you leverage over the part of reality that you deemed relevant before the irrelevant part takes a big role and renders your device useless. What makes it a cheap trick is the fact that for the period during which the elegant/compact explanation of the part of reality that you deemed relevant is still operating you will take advantage of the situation and get things from it (gains) with a tool that is by definition (9.) false. You are paying a cheap price for real gains. <elegance~leverage>
<how good a cheap trick is = how much times it buys + how much leverage it gives>. Premature optimization is root of all evil, seek relief too early from entropy-driven anxiety via a cheap trick and the amount of available data to extract a pattern from is too small to give anything of good quality. Waiting too long is a route to death by perfectionism as you will not just miss your chance to commit to good cheap tricks but also put yourself in danger of succumbing to anxiety. Sense making (Tempo: Decrescendo with emotional relief)
Reflecting on and reorganizing discoveries made during exploration employing (7.) will crystallize the first form of a model (internalization).
(13.) is achieved by dissolving the complexity of a confusing set of facts acquired during (3.) employing (8.) to provide us with an elegant and compelling way to look at the situation. 14/a. To be compelling, is to be comprehensive and organizing as much as possible (about entropy). To be elegant, is to be as compact as possible (about size). Valley (Tempo: Steady, slowing momentum and increasing depression)
Period of decisive action without gains nor validation. Exhaustion of the cheap trick's leverage.
To be sustained by the belief that you are cheating the situation on a grander scale, meaning that, at some point beyond this period you will land on a huge gain. Heavy lift (Tempo: a high-effort, low-coherence increase in momentum)
The model created at (13.) is unstable and that will disintegrate in the absence of situational feedback.
From (17.) we understand that we cannot sustain it indefinitely and it would be wiser to use all the emotional resilience (due to the belief) and energy in one final fierce effort resulting in a forced encounter with reality (externalization). 18/a. <how optimal is the timing of a heavy lift=estimate of the organizing capacity of the cheap trick~how much time it buys>. Emerge too early, you find that you have not extracted enough value from the cheap trick to earn the huge "promised" gain (belief of (16.)). Emerge too late, death by perfectionism.
(18.) leads to entropy increase from decision (compromises ~ imperfections) made out of exhaustion. Books are never finished, merely abondonned.The separation event (Tempo: Crescendo)
The moment when a significant proportion of your model is externalized.j
The moment of truth where the assumptions underlying the leap of faith made through the valley and the push through via heavy lift will either be validated or not.
Birth metaphor. The externalized model is like a baby and as a birthgivers we find ourselves having to let go when we judge that it can live outside our mind. Retrospective (Tempo: Decrescendo, a mix of joy and sorrow)
Period during which we attempt at making sense of our premidpost-separation actions. The narrative is cast into its stable final form (low entropy state)
If the separation is successful, the cheap trick that drove the making of the narrative and is the origin of the created model is validated. If not, we must find meaning amongst the ashes.
[Fuck!! the double freytag has one part which overlaps with freytag which is the last one heavy lift=rising action, climax=separation, retrospective=falling action]

The previous structures are bound by something we call a liminal passage. That is, a part of our lives that is situationally empty caught between two narratively rich contexts. The characteristic tempo during this phase is stillness.
Negotiation
A negotiation is the process of positioning or repositioning the players within a field via logistic discourse.
Confrontational vs. Concessionary style of negotiation. The non-willingness to trade vs the willingness. [ We can also add, Submission. As a non-willingness to trade naturally.]
Frontal, oblique and lateral approach (to a position, in the optic of relocating).
Frontal - doesn't account for anything, direct - get the them to submit.
Oblique - takes advantage of the abouts (situation and actions) of the position.
Lateral - force someone out of position (dismissing all prepared actions) and force them to negotiate from a weaker posture.
Conventional Rules:
Never paint yourself to a corner by revealing your true objective.
Never go back on a point that was already settled.
Giving up or weakening your position, is the fact of revealing way too much that your actions (and by extention your strategy) is given away.
Unilateral action - the opponent is the main target. Bilateral action - the opponent is not only the target but also an instrument.
The frontal approach is to be use when the power ratio is in your favor while the oblique approach works well when it is 1:1.
Straight lines when you have a winning position and curved ones when you are in a losing one. It is easier to lead someone who just committed a mistake than one who didn't.
To this phenomenon there will, strength and weakness. The frontal approach signals confidence in your strength, the oblique is the intention to use the opponents weakness and the lateral is about breaking the opponents will.
#Frontal Approach Used when the power ratio be at least 3:1 in your favor. The arguments of the strongest are always the best. Might makes right. The language of the frontal approach is directive (explicit). When negotiating, the object is to show the opposing party that it is in their interest to ﬁnalize a deal. Speed of execution is crucial as the mobilization of all your assets takes a toll on you. The effect of frontal approach can be magnified combined with a surprise effect. There is also the focus of your power, you aim for a shock effect. It seeks the path of shortest length, <precision + speed>.
#Oblique Approach Used when the power ratio is 1:1. The language of the oblique approach is suggestive (implicit). The idea here is to alter to ratio to your advantage by forcing your opponent to an unbalanced position and strike the generated weakness. When your opponent launches an action against you can get him off balance by deflecting it, dissipate its effect under the form of a discharge (quanta), now the opponent is emptied and proportion of power shifted to your advantage. This is coded in the principles, (1) pull when you are pushed and push when you are pushed and (2) Turn (rotation) when you are pushed and enter (translation) when you are pulled. We seek the path of least expectation.
#Lateral Approach Convincing the opponent that there is no point in struggling, as he will without doubt lose. The language of a lateral approach is metaphoric. The purpose of this approach can be achieve through hidden actions that aim to put your opponent in a disadvantageous posture so that loss is an eventuality, you literally undermine his plans but that requires penetration into his strategic vision which implies complete knowledge of the position and the actions undertook from it. We seek the (unforeseen) path of least cost.
Ways to handle a negotiation, -Getting the other party to accept a principle and then having him draw all the consequences with you. -Determining the points of antagonism and then to bring them closer, degree by degree, until an agreement is reached. -Demonstrating to the opponent that the problem to be addressed is his problem, and then convince him that you are willing to resolve it.
Two ways to disrupt the opponent, -Dissuasion aims at decreasing your adversary’s determination, therefore “emptying the full” by destroying his morale. -Suggestion aims at creating illusion by suggesting dangers to your opponent where they don’t really exist, therefore “ﬁlling his voids” and making him worry.
Never negotiate before you know what the other party desires. [Knowing someone's position implies knowledge of perception, that is his/her model which contains the desires.]
The imagery to have here is that around the position there are action vectors drawn, quiver doodle style, that represent the strategic investments of the player. Players do gauge positions and can only ponder about actions, or they can realize more about the position by analyzing the actions and what are they trying to build to, the strategic vision.
<empty/full> is analog to <weakness/strength>.
A surprise is an entropy-generating device aimed at getting someone to deal with a local imperative
An Observation
Narrative–Entropy–Tempo Negotiation–Value–Position

The space associated to narratives is the modal space while the space associated to negotiation is the logistic space. What is a base definition of both of these spaces?
Language Enters the Picture
Language in its broadest sense provides the content that makes up a decision process. If that structure's I/O flow is filtered through a conversational constraint, the end result is a conversation where the the main type of actions are Speech Acts. The remaining accompanying acts are there as auxiliaries to the main channel of interaction which is Speech.
An Obvious Question
What is the difference between communication and conversation?

I believe that in a conversation there are multiple channels of communication. The most popular ones are the verbal and nonverbal channels. So a conversation is a bunch utterances exchanges but also the behaviorism that accompanies it. In this sense, communication is a channel of exchange of a certain type of codded meaning. A conversation is a combination of multiple communication channels to model a very complex exchange where channels can leak data into each other.
Perfect Position
You see those positions which seem ideal and then once you reach them any action vector only leads to worst-than-before positions. A similar thing occurs in chess under the name of Zugzwang, a position where anything you do is bad, well one can debate that such position is the accumulation of lack of good options but the result is similar to what I am trying to describe. The nuance is that what I am referring to is a position accessed with no prior accumulation of bad options, it was consciously sought as, a perfect position. The choice of name is so on point because similarly to these positions, perfect is static and change can only lead it out of its perfection, namely, to imperfect status. I believe that everyone of us who sought perfection once and "attained" it - in the sense that one got as close as reality allows it locally, implying that once there, there were no further ascending actions available - there was nothing to do but (most of work was about) hold(ing) that position. You know the famous saying, "The hardest part about being the best is not to get there, but to stay.". What we understand from this is that the worst thing that can happen to you when you are in a perfect position, is being forced to do something about your logistic dispositions because anything you do is degrading. It is like a saturation of power structure, when the structure is in a form that allows its full capacity to be attained, the structure has to empty first to gain some flexibility and then alter its form (through flow actions), which translates as passing through imperfect phases. What can we do then? Perfect positions ought to be used as threat-ideas and not be taken (as positions) unless it is the right time, because once taken you have everything to lose. You want to have a perfect x imperfect relationship when they come at you, but not when you are compelled to come at them. Since that would imply that you have to break from perfection and hope that the imperfect x imperfect goes well and was worth what you gave up. The best one can do is to maintain an imperfect status with the ability to access perfect positions when necessary. This way you are hiding the what-I-can-do or what-would-be-best-for-me information from others to whom that might prove crucial to score a win over you.
Update to the Vision
A refinement of the vision for this project is that we have two components, (a) the form of the understanding and (b) the content. So far the form builds from decision-making supplemented with a conversational constraint + a dichotomy of conversation into <narrative+negotiation> which are both understood in terms of two decision-making variables being resp. tempo and position. Once the form finished it will be supplied with content which for most part follows from language through speech acts.
Language Content
Language codifies meaning from experience and allows the usage of that code according to our understanding to affect social reality. The first part is done via the introduction of a new word which is supposed to register a newly relevant object (of reality ) or perception. To see how the second part is done we have to grasp that an object always has an associated perception that is shaped by the understanding within which that object finds meaning. While the object stays the same, its perception can vary. We can use that to alter perception - redraw the relevancy - via language use.
How ones does that is through, association. By frequently mentioning something along with other things with a certain perceptual quality you contaminate the perception of the thing in question and so deforms the way it is relevant. Meaning accrues to words and phrases from their previous occurrences and as their associations change so too do their meanings.
Regarding the social reality side, speakers are related via bonds and relationships that evolve as a result of social interactions. Any human activity involving interaction, has a social component to it that isn't about the activity or the matter in question but more about bonds and relations. Every human activity has its proper language which implies that language acts have both referential and non-referential value. Language can be used so to emphasize one value over the other. Referential language is focused on speaking about things while non-referential is about setting the kind+degree of the relations.
The knowledge-language complex that I've explored before in some medium posts has something to offer here by considering the notion of shared knowledge. The immediate implication of such notion is a language that is equally shared which allows those who share a similar knowledge of a part of experience - shared world - to communicate about it employing minimal reference through a restricted code. Such code cannot be understood by someone with no prior grasp of such knowledge. In contrast, an elaborated code is realized in way that even someone lacking knowledge about whatever we are speaking can internalize enough meaning to have a relatively clear impression of the situation.
[Another interesting complex is the language-perception one, as both language and perception cannot be conceived without each other. They both influence and make each other.] The relation between language and perception is such that people sharing the same language or languages with close qualities are enabled to hold certain perceptions while being equally inhibited from considering others. This can be explained by what makes a language at a base level, that is, vocabulary and grammar. The regular vocabulary usage influences how the categorization of the world is effected, while the routine grammatical preferences influence the logic by which that categorization is understood. A logic of understanding always implies an <ir/relevant> filter which orders things. Categorization and ordering modes being language signatures, they generate perception via two acts, the first takes the picture [referring to the observed reality] and splits it into bits (following some categorization scheme) and the second takes those bits ranks them by relevance (via some ordering scheme). [The mechanism by which the <ir/relevant> filter works is by distinguishing what is meaningful to the situation of interest. The choice of what is meaningful is affected both by knowledge and ignorance undiscernibly. The knowledge of what is meaningful contributes to the filter in a good way while ignorance leads to an automatic characterization as meaningless which induces imprecisions in final product of the process which employed such filter.]
Whatever was discussed in the previous paragraph suggests a method to analyze utterances and extract the pieces that form the perception behind a language act. Whenever one encodes something of experience into language, he is fitting it into a systematic code that is designed to express meaning both paradigmatically and syntagmatically; that is, the choice of a language token from a category of similar ones and the arrangement of such tokens into a structural pattern. Language under this lens is a code formed by tokens associated to mental constructs that represents the user's understanding of what is happening, a language event. When something happening is internalized, it is both given a name and catalogued along with mental constructs that perceived as similar. The catalogue is named a paradigm. It contains language tokens for similar happenings. By choosing a token from a paradigm, the user is choosing a meaning. The choice is influence by both what is happening and our ability to tell what (and why) other elements within the paradigm aren't fitting. The language act's code is produced by ordering tokens under some structural pattern - which takes the various meanings and produce a higher order one designed to answer the situation. We call it a syntagm. The way we can such ideas is by let's say (1) take an utterance and see the various ways we can meaningfully separate its tokens (keeping in mind that a token can be more than one word) and so recover the various syntagmatic structures encoded in the act, (2) think about the paradigmatic choices in each structure and deduce the meaning behind it and (3) integrate overall all possible structures and distill the contrasted meaning than can be accessed through a deduced perception.
Human activity is principled by the notion of least effort and so is every human interaction. In this sense, expression and impression are formed and bound by no-harder-than-needed condition to be understood or understand. This has an immediate consequence which ties language of frequent use to the dominant understanding. The tie is formed by having words of frequent use acquire certain associations leading to instant attitudinal responses, impressions. Those responses are exhibited by the majority because they stem from the shared dominant understanding.
Language is most often packaged either via text or speech. Both satisfy opposing needs as media of language. Following from the needs of this research on conversation and their linguistic ingredients being utterances, our interest is focused on speech. Each time one casts a speech (act), attention is directed toward some things and away from others. Such is the purpose of a speech event. Language acts in general are meant to produce a transfer of interpretation and perception via the same contrast mechanism actioned through a speech act.
Speech is not transitory in value in the sense that it not only provides information about the subject matter but is also revealing of the speaker's model of the current situation. Speech is irreversible. Once something is said, it cannot be unsaid.
Utterances as speech acts have three aspects being, (a) the locution, uttering of a recognizable sound pattern, (b) illocutionary force the occurence of an act of discursive power intended influence over others and (c) perlocutionary effect an effect on others is generated . A speech act doesn't possess a unique meaning nor a single purpose. This allows for the combination of force vectors and thus a variety of effects can be produced.
Metaphors are the basis from which speech act derive their meaning. They are devices that provide with a logic to structure the domains of experience that compose the situation within which we are trying to operate. The one who chooses the metaphor selects the logic and thus will have ease in maneuvering the situation. To understand the workings of a metaphor one ought to examine its implied notions+dialectics and assess the value of the leverage offered by that logic to product a desired effect. If the operating metaphor isn't working in your favor, you should consider changing it to one with implications that better align with your needs or created a new one tailored to fit them. [The way this can be used against someone is by figuring out what implications doesn't suit the other party and show that they effectively stem from an accepted way rationalizing the situation.]
Discourse
What is the difference between a conversation and a discourse?
Every conversation is a discursive activity in society. Every discourse is a social event in itself.
What is discourse?
discourse as a system of thought, knowledge, or communication that constructs our experience of the world. Since control of discourse amounts to control of how the world is perceived, social theory often studies discourse as a window into power.
Every discourse act is an act of power.
discourse is understood more narrowly as linguistic information exchange
Conversation, psychology.
In conversations, I design the long run; the narrative. People generally go short and get focused too much on the next utterance, doing what seems to be right at the moment. Yet they don't realize that this makes them very "manipulable" because of two things, (1) adopting a local rationality that seems to be valid at the moment leading them be short-sighted and integrating as few information as possible; manifesting emotional centricity, forceful focus on certain points and mostly being short tempered. And (2) the urge to control every moment coming from their commitment to a short-term rationality which keeps evolving as the situation does, implies that they have to keep claiming ascendance or else things will get out of their control. The two previous mistakes not only put them in a psychological loop but they also make them vulnerable and more prone to mistake, in other words easy to lead around. I already proposed the <conversation=narrative+negotiation> formula to structure our understanding about human communication. The mistake people do is to mostly focus on the negotiation side, as in negotiating the fact that they are right (right now), the fact that their view is most suited for reading the situation and other peripheric things. It doesn't take much more than the back up of some experiential social knowledge about what works verbally backed with certain social biases and etiquettes to help paint the person the color you want them to have; it is easy most of that has been worked by society already. In contrast, it is much harder to get to see the person's true colors if you are determined to taint them. All that being said, negotiation is good on short-term but on the long-term it is how the story looks like which will have most of the dominant effect. Ever experienced a moment where you felt like you nailed the person still in retrospective it doesn't feel like you did anything of what you thought. 